
===== PAGE 1 =====
The Psychological Record, 1965, 15, 571-575.
PRENATAL SOUND STIMULATION ON POSTNATAL
RAT OFFSPRING OPEN FIELD BEHAVIORS1
MIKE MORRA
Xavier University
The impact of an intrinsically neutral stimulus (standard door
buzzer), presented in a novel setting during the second semester
of pregnancy, was capable of altering rat offspring behavior in
the open field on Day 25, postpartum. Twenty-four female albino
rats of approximately 120 days of age were used. This sound
stressed group was compared to two control groups; a condi
tioned-fear group and a non-stressed group. The direction of the
behavioral differences was increased emotionality between the
sound-fear group and the control group (p<.Ol). These find
ings suggested that the stressor may have acted directly on the
fetus rather than indirectly via the placental barrier.
The adverse effects of maternal anxiety during pregnancy on off
spring behaviors have been reported by a number of investigators. These
studies presented evidence of significant increase of emotionality (Ader
& Belfer, 1962; Doyle & Yule, 1959; Hockman, 1961; Morra, 1965;
Thompson, Watson & Charlesworth, 1962), reduced cognitive efficiency
(Davids, Holden & Gray, 1963; Graham, Ernhart, Thurston & Craft,
1962), and decreased vitality and viability (Antonov, 1947; Hockman,
1961; Morra, 1965). On the other hand, "positive effects" (greater
resistance to stress; less emotionality) have been reported by Ader
and Conklin (1963), with prenatal handling; Furchtgott and Echols
( 1958), with prenatal x-irradiation; and Vincent (1958), with prenatal
alcoholism.
These effects of matern al anxiety have been attributed to con
ditioned avoidance (Thompson, 1957) and to the direct action of a
maternal noxious experience (Antonov, 1947; Sontag, 1944). However,
contemporary motivation theory suggests that the impact of any stimulus
on an organism is derived not only from its inherent capability to
produce approach and avoidance behaviors (i.e. meaningfulness, hut
also from its characteristics of intensity and variation. (Fiske & Maddi,
1961, pp. 11-56). Consequently, the impetus of a "neutral" stimulus
(e.g. standard door buzzer) should be capable of inducing fear when
it causes the organism to depart markedly from optimal levels of
arousal.
This study attempted to test this proposition in a design in which
a moderate level of intermittent sound stimulation was administered
to female albino rats, in a novel setting, during the second semester
1 This project was supported by the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee.

===== PAGE 2 =====
572 MORRA
of pregnancy. The behaviors of these animals were compared to those
of two contral groups, a pre-pregnancy avoidance trained group and a
handled-only graup. The avoidance trained group was used as a control
group in that all previous prenatal stress studies, to date, have considered
avoidance conditioning in their designs.
METHOD
Subjects
Twenty-four female rats of Wistar strain, obtained from the Budd
Mountain Rodent Farm, were divided randomly into three graups.
These animals were between 120 and 140 days of age at the beginning
of the experiment. In addition, 18 male albino rats, approximately 150
days of age, were used in the mating procedure. These animals were
assigned randomly to six cages in graups of three rats per cage.
Of the female rats, Group I received pre-pregnancy avoidance
training and exposure to the conditioned stimulus during the second
phase of pregnancy. Group II received only the es exposure treatment
during the same second period of pregnancy and Graup III received
only equal handling during the same period during pregnancy. Thirteen
out of the 24 mothers produced litters (six in Group III; three in Group
II; and four in Group I). These litters were all born within 6 days, i.e.,
Days 22-27 (counting from Day 1 of mating).
Sixty-three offspring from Group III, 35 offspring from Graup 11,
and 26 offspring from Group I were tested in the open field. The sizes
of the litters on Day 25 are reported in Table 1. These differences in
viability were consistent with the differences reported by other investi
gators (Ader & Belfer, 1962; Doyle & Yule, 1959; Hockman, 1961;
Morra, 1965). An analysis of the fertility and viability data was not
attempted since it has already been demonstrated that these differences
were not due to specific experimental conditions. The actual variables
associated with these findings have not yet been researched.
Apparatus
The apparatus used in the avoidance training was a modified
Mowrer-Miller shock avoidance box having interior dimensions as
fallows: length, 36 in.; width, 5 in.; height, 2~f ft. The grid Haar con
sisted of 1/16-in. diameter bars spaced 'J~ in. apart horizontally, and
beneath this grid there were four bars equally spaced running length
wise. A 3-in. high electrified barder across the middle of the box divided
it into two parts. The es was a noise of 3.25 sec. duration produced
bya door buzzer. The DeS was a 3.0 ma electric shock to the grids from
a dc constant current generator which came on .35 sec. after the
cessation of the es. An electric timer was activated at the time that
the es was terminated. Exactly one minute after the cessation of
the es, a new trial was begun with shock now administered to the
other side. A commutator motor scrambled the grid bars so that all
bars were charged in relation to each other. The entire apparatus, includ-

===== PAGE 3 =====
PRENATAL SOUND STIMULATION 573
ing the recycling, was automatie so that E had only to record the avoid
an ce behaviors. The estimated over-all sound pressure in db (Re:
.0002 microbar) was 85.
The open field apparatus used in the offspring testing was con
structed out of ~~-in. plywood and was unpainted. Its dimensions were
25 in. lang, 25 in. wide, 2 ft. high. Twenty-five squares were marked
off in red paint and uniform lighting was provided by an overhanging
60 w bulb.
Procedure
Each animal in Group I was placed in the non-shock side of the
shuttlebox at the beginning of the trial phase. It received avoidance
training at the rate of 20 trials a day for six consecutive days. At the
end of this pretraining, the animals of all three groups were placed
in mating cages for three consecutive days. Each mating ca ge con
sisted of four females and three males. This mating procedure was
used in order to minimize the effects of handling during pregnancy
and to avoid the possible confounding effects of the additional stress
brought about by the vaginal smear technique.
On Day 12 (counting from Day 1 of mating), the animals in Groups
land II were returned to the avoidance apparatus and were exposed
only to the sound of the buzzer (Le. es for Group I) for eight consecu
tive days. Each animal received three trials, twice daily, with an inter
block interval of approximately one hour. The animals were not pre
vented from traversing to the adjacent section of the shuttlebox. Group
III received equal and similar handling throughout this same period.
This handling included the removal of the animal from its home cage,
the placing of it into the avoidance apparatus, and the return to the
home cage.
On Day 19 (again counting from Day 1 of mating), the animals
were isolated and were given equal amounts of nesting materials. No
cross-fostering was attempted since no primary effects of fastering were
reported by other investigators. On Day 23 postpartum, the offspring
were weaned and 2 days later they were tested in the open field for
one one-minute trial per rat.
RESULTS AND DIseUSSION
The data for the offspring are presented in Table 1. Analysis of
variance tests were applied to measures of frequency of traversals and
initial latency times. Orthogonal camparisans of the groups were not
necessary since the differences obtained were obvious upon inspection
of the data. The analysis of the travers al measure yielded differences
between the control group III and both stress groups (F=5.56;
df=2/123; p<.Ol). The stressed groups were characterized by less activ
ity. The analysis of the latency measure yielded significant differences be
tween Group II (sound-stressed) and Groups land III (F=5.84;
df=2/123; p<.Ol). With both measures, the sound-stressed group dif-

===== PAGE 4 =====
574 MORRA
fered significantly from the control group (III) in the direction of greater
emotionality (i.e. less activity and greater latency in a novel setting).
The number of male and female offspring among the three groups were
not significantly different, consequently no analysis of the sex variable
was necessary. Ader and Belfer (1962) found that ". .. irrespective of
sex . . ., the offspring of the manipulated mothers were significantly
more emotional."
TABLE 1
OPEN FIELD BEHAVIORS OF RAT OFFS PRING ON DAY 25
Conditioned Sound Handled
Fear Fear Only
(Group I) (Group II) (Group III)
Number
Offspring 26 35 63
Mean Number
Traversals 15.8 14.2 19.5
u
Traversals 5.7 8.3 8.4
Mean Initial
Latencies (sec) 13.5 18.8 13.1
u
Latencies (sec) 6.1 8.2 7.9
The proposition tested in this study was supported by the data.
That is, the impact of an intrinsically neutral stimulus (standard door
buzzer) presented in a novel setting, during the second semester of
pregnancy, was capable of altering rat offspring behaviors on Day 25,
postpartum. The direction of the behavioral differences was increased
emotionality between the sound-stressed group (II) and the control
group. The conditioned-fear group did not differ from the sound-stressed
group in activity which suggested that the findings reported by
Thompson (1957; 1962) were confounded by the systematic effects
of the buzzer treatment during pregnancy. It is possible that the fear
component produced by this novel experience accounted for a con
siderable portion of the variation reported by Thompson ( 1957).
Interestingly enough, the question of whether these offspring
behavioral differences were due to the stress state of the matemal host
remains unresolved. The fact that a smaller number of litters occurred
among the mothers of Groups land II (stress groups) might be taken
to support the notion of basic disturbances in matemal physiology. Vari
ations in the productivity of the experimental litters as a result of
special conditions during pregnancy has also been noted by other
investigators (e.g. Hockman, 1961). It is possible that certain types
of "psychological" stressors are capable of affecting the fetus directly
rather than indirectly via the placental barrier. Currently, a replication
of this study is in process in which fertile chick eggs are being used
as 5s. This choice of organism will tend to factor out the effects of the
matemal influences on the developing fetus.

===== PAGE 5 =====
PRENATAL SOUND STIMULATION 575
REFERENCES
ADER, R. & BELFER, M. L. Prenatal maternal anxiety and offspring emotionality
in the rat. Psychol. Rep., 1962, 10, 711-718.
ADER, R. & CONKLIN, P. M. Handling of pregnant rats: Effects on emotionality
of their offipring. Science, 1963, 142, 411-412.
ANTONOV, A. N. Children born during the seige of Leningrad. ]. Pediat., 1947,
30, 250-259.
DAVIDS, A., HOLDEN, R. H. & GRAY, G. B. Maternal anxiety during pregnancy
and adequacy of mother and child adjustment. Child Developm., 1963, 34,
993-1002.
DOYLE, G. A. & YULE, E. P. Early experience and emotionality: The effect of
prenatal and maternal anxiety on emotionality of albino rats. S. Atr. ].
Soc. Res., 1959, 10, 57-77.
FISKE, D. W. & MADDI, S. R. A conceptual framework. In D. W. Fiske & S. R.
Maddi, (Eds.), Functions of varied experience. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey
Press, 1961. Pp. 11-56.
FURCHTGOTT, E. & ECHOLS, M. Locomotor coordination following pre- und
neonatal x-irradiation. ]. camp. physiol., Psychol., 1958, 51, 292-294.
GRAHAM, F. K, ERNHART, C. B., THURSTON, D. & CRAFT, M. Development
three years after perinatal anoxia and other potentially damaging new
born experiences. Psychol. Monogr., 1962,76,3,522, 53pp.
HOCKMAN, C. H. Prenatal maternal stress in the rat: Its effects on emotional
behavior in the offspring. J camp. physiol. Psychol., 1961, 54, 679-684.
MORRA, M. Varying levels of prenatal stress during two periods on rat offspring
behaviors. Psychonomic Sei. in press.
SONTAG, L. W. War and the fetal-maternal relationship. Marriage and Family
Living, 1944, 6, 1-5.
THOMPSON, W. R. Influence of prenatal and maternal anxiety on emotionality in
young rats. Seience, 1957, 125, 698-699.
THOMPSON, W. R., WATSON, J. & CHARLESWORTH, W. R. The effects of
prenatal maternal stress on offspring behavior in rats. Psychol. MonogT., 1962,
76, No. 38, 1-26.
VINCENT, N. M. The effects of prenatal alcoholism upon motivation, emotionality,
and learning in the rat. Amer. Psychologist, 1958, 13, 401, (Abstract).